He's a good writer, too.
Very fun.
He's a good writer.
He's written some beautiful things.
The book that he did on Logan, I think, is exceptionally good.
Some things I can tell you, but I cannot tell you.
I don't want you to do anything that this is going to be a very good-spirited book.
I'm not out to embarrass anybody, but I want to tell some nice stories.
I'm going to see Ed Wolfe.
I spent some time with Steve Riley.
I'm told I should talk to Rostenberg and Stern.
They might have some interesting stories to tell.
I'm going to go to the University of Texas.
Do you know anything about Harry Ransom?
Well, there's a lot to know about Harry Ransom, but...
I haven't got enough material to give you the background.
How about just off the record background, could you tell me how he was able to do such a marvelous... Something about his methods.
His methods are quite interesting, aren't they?
Well, let's talk about the other thing.
You just think about that.
Cheers.
Here's a happy new year.
Thank you very much.
God bless you and your children.
Thank you.
God bless you and your family.
I'll shut this off in a moment.
400 letters of Dickens to Mrs. Koops, Farron's Koops, which I paid, I don't know, $7,000, $8,000, $9,000 for the Morgan Library.
I bought for the Morgan Library.
This is an object?
This was a Pachmanay Gallery.
Well, Barrett kept out five or six.
And then he put them into a later sale recently in the last year.
And the five or six letters that he sold brought more than the 400.
The five letters that he sold brought more
And this is why we couldn't sell before.
No, he didn't want, he wanted to.
Oh, he couldn't.
No, Roger.
So he kept the best way.
Roger's a good friend of mine.
He's a lawyer.
I know him very well.
Know the whole family.
And he thought he'd keep them, but he decided to sell them, so he sent them over to the gallery.
What do you feel when you pick up, like, a...
do you feel anything when you're holding something like that no i don't feel anything it's become become a commercial thing like uh like like this guy's a waiter like you're a writer like you're a house house you're a social worker social worker oh that's good social workers good we need a lot of
we need more social workers than booksellers and anything she's good she's such a compassionate woman you know it's more than nothing anything else the hell with anything else did you see the times this morning that the state of connecticut is going to buy condos now yes yes crazy times people used to say condos were the future that's right
You told me that there has not been a great collection, any book at all, written about Robert Fulton in 60 years.
And I said, naively, there has to be more to him than the steamboat.
And then you said...
You said, bear that in mind.
Diplomatically and scientifically, he was one of the greats.
And you know this because you said he built the great collection.
I built one of the great collections.
So you know what the name is.
So I know.
Right.
That's the point, because you built the collection.
And if I were a younger man, I would write it.
I would begin to write a life of reference.
What about him impressed you?
Who?
So you were basically a bookman, and you were building a collection.
You built hundreds of collections.
What was there about Robert Fulton that particularly intrigued you, is the word I was looking for.
Well, he intrigued me.
His versatility, his knowledge, and government, and science.
Who did you build the collection for?
An individual or an institution?
Individual.
And it is still an individual collection?
Or is it now an institution?
It's in a museum.
So you can tell me that, right?
It's at the New York Historical Society.
I've managed to go there.
I've managed to see it go there.
Yeah.
It was quite enough.
You mean oil paintings or sketches?
Yeah, yeah.
Well, anyone who could design a steamboat as more than an inventor.
Oh.
But his science and his diplomacy with Jefferson and these men, they were mad at him.
I mean, corresponded to him.
well if you were a collector if i was if i were you i did everything up and i'd write a life of books really yeah i think i think it could be a that's the next book maybe maybe that's book number two
This is book number one, because I'm under contract for this one.
I don't care.
I'm teasing, but I'm sorry.
You're telling me something based on years of knowledge and insight.
It's never been in my knowledge.
And of course you'll find
material all over the country, which basically was one of the founders of the New York Historic Society.
And the material there is just...
Well, you know, you forget.
I had a friend.
He invented the steamboat.
But that kind of recedes in memory, doesn't it?
And people forget who this guy was.
So clearly he was much more than a man who invented the means of transportation.
He changed the way that people traveled for centuries.
That's your answer.
It's stuck in my brain, you know, and I said closer.
A visionary man, and I looked around and said, Brent was the last.
Now what you're saying is that a collector came to you and said, I'm interested in Robert Fulton.
And so fine.
being a professional book dealer, you said, I'll do what I can.
And you acquired extraordinary things, obviously.
And in the process of doing this, it dawned on you that there's a possibility for books.
Based on the archival material that you put together?
Not only on the material that's available.
Why is it untapped?
I don't know.
That's one question I cannot answer.
That's why the collector is important.
This is one of the theses that I have.
This is what the collector does.
People like yourself who assist the collector and build the collector.
is that you produce a body of work that can then be used to create an important work, either a history, a work of art, a work of documentation, whatever.
I think that's an example of what he's saying.
And that's the one that hasn't been done yet.
That's the best part of it.
That's what makes it point to me.
I think that man was so crazy, you know, and so little written about it.
Did he have an interesting life?
Very.
I mean, personally, not just creatively.
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Love affairs, scandals, septal interest, that would go beyond a scholarly readership.
No, I think it's more scholarly than...
well obviously i'm literary because if i weren't i wouldn't be doing this book you know dave david mccullough did a book about the panama you know david mccullough wrote the book about the brooklyn bridge oh yeah yeah he took subjects that nobody
Well, Robles, I knew very well.
You knew Robles?
Of course.
Who made the best collectors?
Doctors, lawyers?
You never can tell.
Businessmen?
Businessmen.
They have come out of the woodworks.
They come out of the woodworks.
He told me, he said, at the closure club, they really want to have...
Business, they want Wall Street types on the board because they get things done.
But that's what I would do.
Bear that in mind.
No, he'd like to do it.
Do I bear it in mind?
I've talked to him.
The piano guy now, right?
What kind of a collection did he have?
You mean his own stuff?
The sons of the original... But his own documents about the making of the... It wasn't a book collection, for se, it was a documentary collection.
That's how I go on from one to another, you see.
I think of these things, you know... As I just mentioned, I've got the machinery again.
You probably told me today about five different collections that you sent away of the New York Historical Society.
And you said, why send it out there?
Give it to Landauer with one Steinway.
You mentioned something about tickets or something like that.
Oh yeah, the Landauer collection.
That's right.
It's all there.
You love this city then, don't you?
Well, listen.
You send a lot of things to a historical place.
Yeah, I sent a lot of stuff to Boston, to Brandeis.
When they started original, I sent them a lot of stuff.
I sent them, they gave them a building.
gave him $250,000 to put up a building at Brandeis called the American Civilization Building.
But of course, the guy gave him the money, $250,000, and his name was on it, but he didn't give him any money to do it.
Isn't that amazing?
Usually it's the other way around.
They give the collection, but they don't give him any money to maintain it.
It's the other way around, usually.
You know, they give this wonderful collection, but then they say, how come we afford to keep it?
And that's probably why they had to sell the, if Rosenwald had given them enough money to keep that document, you know, that's, again, now that's a very interesting, I hadn't thought of that.
See, when John Carter Brown, when their family set up the library at Brown,
Well, they not only built the building, but they gave a half a million dollars, which 80 years ago is a lot of money.
So therefore, they've got a beautiful library there that's able to maintain itself.
When J.P.
Morgan set up the library, he gave money to maintain it.
That's why it's able to go.
I think your point is extremely well made.
You have to do both.
This guy gives the building, but nothing to put in it.
So you had to get the collection to put in it.
Otherwise, what's the good of the collection?
There's no collection.
You get my point.
You get it together.
So where did you get the stuff to put in it?
I didn't get it.
It turned into something else.
He died.
The guy died.
And that was the end of it.
The building was there.
and uh and so what went into it we have to heat the building we have to clean the building and there's nothing in it so what finally went in i don't know they put something
Why would he do it that way?
I guess he wanted to do something.
It was a gesture.
It's like giving money to the church.
Can I tell you what's in the guy's mind?
I'm not that smart.
I'm not a mind reader.
I can't.
You know, look at his name on the boobie.
Well, Harry Whitener.
Did you know the Whitener family, by the way?
Now, he went down to the Titanic.
Yeah, that's right.
And then he had a nice, modest little collection.
If you listen to people, he was one of the greatest collectors.
He wasn't.
He was a young man.
But his mother hired Rosenbach to put together a great collection.
But what she did is she built this wonderful library named the Canary Widener Library.
Which is a great institution.
Which is an extraordinary institution.
And she also had Rosenbach to buy a few more books.
Well, that helps, you know.
That's a pretty good story, isn't it?
You don't mind if I'm telling the truth about you.
I love it.
This is what I want to do.
Did you know Newton?
I knew him very well.
I knew his son even better.
You knew everybody.
Shukti, I knew very well, but I knew everybody who's involved in books and it's very interesting.
Of course, I've lived all through it.
Tell me, do we repeat this?
My daughter-in-law published a...
A book of, she wrote a book of, illustrated a book on Joyce.
Sells now for $10,000.
Your daughter-in-law did this?
Yeah.
Susan Wilde.
Susan Wilde?
Susan Wilde, yes.
She illustrated this big illustrated thing.
There must be a limited edition of it.
It is, yes, to 50 copies and all sold.
It now sells for $10,000.
Wow.
I bought the first one.
I paid them $2,500.
Now it's, I don't want it.
I still have it.
Would you like some coffee?
Yes.
It should be a little bit of coffee.
Regular coffee.
Maybe some dessert to someone first.
No, I want to go back.
I'm not eating pizza.
Coffee also?
Coffee first.
What do you remember about Newton?
Was he a... Well, he was a very interesting character.
Swifty I knew much better, of course.
But he was a...
He's an interesting man.
Who's Swifty?
Swifty was... His son.
His son, okay.
He's the last guy to write really best-selling books about book watching.
Yeah, well, he wrote those books, you know.
They were basically stories in the Atlantic Mercury, I guess.
Right, right, right, right.
With a little bit of luck, I'll write something like that.
Well, there's a feel for it.
People are eager for anecdotes, you know.
Well, that's what I'm doing.
But with a purpose.
There's a purpose, too.
I mean, there's a purpose to what I'm writing about.
You know this guy, Broccoli?
Matthew Buckley.
I have his private phone number.
I haven't called him.
He's the guy we ran into at the restaurant in Washington, D.C., at the 88, at Galileo's restaurant.
Look at that guy with a short crew cut.
Yeah.
He's the biographer of Scott Fitzgerald, and he has a Hemingway thing.
Well, he writes them.
He writes them overnight.
He writes a bibliography overnight.
Yeah.
He did the biography of Mitchell Kennelly, which I thought was... I thought it stunk.
Oh, it didn't sell.
It was much.
It was terribly written.
I knew Mitchell Kennelly as well as I know my own children.
Did he capture Mitchell Kendall?
No, he didn't know what the hell he was talking about.
Where did he miss it?
He missed it all over.
He came up to see me and I told him.
So Buckley did.
Buckley did?
Well, Mitchell Kendall, I saw him die.
He owed me $2,000.
Committed suicide, you know.
He was quite a character.
He was a wonderful human being.
He had the Anderson Galleries, right?
Right.
He was the head of the Anderson Galleries.
And he is a story about wine, women, and so on.
With him, it was wine and women.
Never mind the song.
I'm sorry.
It could be so.
What do you remember about that?
Bob Dick Kenwood?
Richard Kenwood?
I do him very well.
I do him intimately well.
Intimately well.
Did he know his stuff?
Did he?
Yes.
He had, I'm telling you, a couple words that... Too much women and too much...
He enjoyed his life.
You were going to tell me something about John Quick.
Well, he was a lawyer in New York.
Yeah, but he is really responsible for supporting writers.
And collecting writers like Joseph Conrad and Joyce and V.H.
Lawrence.
That's right.
That was his field.
And they say he's responsible for making the collecting of modern, of contemporaries fashionable.
And I guess that's why I'm interested.
In a way, in a way you could, yes, in a way you could, yes.
But you said he was kind of... Well, he was out to make a buck.
Really?
That's not the impression you get.
The impression I get is that he was a patron.
He supported these people.
That's not true.
You're breaking all these legendary views.
I don't care what I... Basically, there's no sense to it.
Well, you think that when he...
Of course they say that he would give money to Grace and to Pound and to all these others.
But he always got stuff.
But he always got stuff in return.
He got manuscripts and stuff.
He got manuscripts.
He got paintings.
He got drawings.
He had everything.
That's the kicker, isn't it?
It wasn't just support.
He was buying stuff at bargain basement prices is what he was doing.
And he knew it.
At least he had the taste to know it.
He had the taste to know it.
That's interesting, though.
And Mitchell Kennelly did a great thing by putting out the Quinn catalog.
I have it.
Two volumes in the blackboard.
Wonderful.
Joseph Conrad is the pointy's piece.
Oh.
You'd think that somebody dead, a great whiter, but he had somebody alive, which is very unusual.
That hadn't happened before.
Did you ever have any dealings with Weiss, Thomas J. Weiss?
No.
He was in London.
Yeah, but he dealt with Americans.
Well... But he really wasn't a dealer.
He really wasn't.
He was a faker.
He was the great forger.
And yet...
You know, he put together one of the greatest libraries.
I mean, it's the actually library.
How can you figure that?
What gets into people's minds?
Did you ever get suckered by any forgeries?
Listen, no.
listen i'm not a psychiatrist i can only answer questions from from the bread and butter line you know other than that i have no i i don't profess to be it i lived a long time and i lived among these people and i i began to know them you know and they knew me and which is one of the best
I asked Mitchell Kenley one day.
He used to come in.
I saw him every day, every day.
Every day.
He is.
He asked him one day.
One day, I said to him, Mitchell, I said, who do you think?
is one of the greatest upcoming booksellers in America.
At that time, I didn't know what his answer was.
He said, Bonnie Byer.
You never heard this name.
I knew Bonnie Byer very well.
P-Y-E-I?
P-Y.
And I knew him.
He was a great buyer in the famous sale.
Not the Quinn, but the other one.
Bishop.
Not the Bishop.
The musical writer.
Jerome Currie.
Jerome Currie, a great buyer.
And I was surprised that he told me.
You know, I was
I just asked a question, and I was surprised that he didn't.
Of course, there was Gabriel Wells, who was knowledgeable.
So was that a significant answer when he said Barney Byer?
Well, it was, to me, it was more than a significant answer.
To me, it led me to a new line of
people, you see.
I knew Bonnie Byer.
So was he right on that, by the way?
Was he on the money?
Well, he died very young.
But I mean, was Kennelly on the money with that assessment?
Yes.
So he was very perspicacious then, he was very astute.
That's right.
But he impressed you then?
He impressed me with that remark, because I didn't think of Bonnie Byer being the
I was wrong.
Listen, have you ever been wrong in your life?
Many times.
But I admit I was wrong, you know.
Did your wife take part of your interest in books?
No.
She was a house driver.
She was very happy with her children and with her grandchildren.
And she loved the farm.
You should love table clothes.
What does it do with all the vegetables?
Do you sell them and give them to the back?
No, I give them away.
I mean, I just go out in the summertime and pick the corn and take it in and eat it right.
You love that out there, huh?
Your own garlic?
Yes, I love my garlic, my own onion.
How about the kids?
Horseradish.
I do my own horseradish.
I grew everything, every damn thing.
Did the kids enjoy it out at the park?
Oh, yeah, they enjoyed it.
They enjoyed it.
They used to come home, big bags of zucchini and cucumbers and tomatoes.
When fall came around, did you kind of look forward to returning to the bustle of the big city, though?
That's right, yes.
New Yorker all the way, right?
Yes, New Yorker all the way.
You know, we've had a wonderful session.
I've had three and a half hours with you.
I can't believe that it's turned so quickly.
It's like a dream.
I didn't know if you'd have an opportunity to meet you.
I can't, I can't, and I'd like to,
see you again.
Well, when you come, please bring your wife and I'll take you to a restaurant.
I will take you to a restaurant.
No, no, no, no, no.
But you'd like me to bring my wife?
Yeah, bring your wife.
This is a retreat from me.
I'm usually going with the girls about working on my project.
Come, come, come.
Thank you.
I'm going to shut this off.
I think it's... The thing is...
I just said again, I shut off, but not only have you experienced it all, but you appreciate it.
You savored it.
And I guess to put it all into perspective, have people, have collectors, book lovers changed it all over the last 75 years of your experience?
Are we still pretty much the same?
What should I say?
They became more sophisticated, you know what I mean?
More of the sophistication of ideas and what field they want to go in.
Or more focused, to go back to that word.
More focused.
Well, I don't think you can put together the kind of great library today that Henry Huntington's collection.
I mean, you can't go out.
No, you can't.
Well, you could.
You never can say you can't, because there are always things coming up as a surprise.
In the Martin collection.
There's a great chance for somebody to start some great collection.
Assuming you've got $50 million or something.
We assume that, right?
There you go.
That's a chance.
You can buy some top plate things, you know.
Well, as David Redden said to me, he said, you know, I see paintings go for 20, 30.
David Redden is a child, you know.
I know David.
He's still a boy.
Yeah, but he said, I see paintings go for 30 and 40 million dollars.
He said, you could buy a wonderful library, everything, for 10 or 15 million, and he's right.
You know, if you've got the money, assuming you've got the money, you can have a world class.
I had a customer in Chicago, and he called me up one day.
He was in London.
And he said, this will give you one picture of an idea.
He was in London, and he said, look, it's my wife's birthday, and I want to buy it something.
Will you look around and see what you can find?
That's the type of trust people.
How do I know what you would mean?
Your husband would call me.
How would I know what you would mean?
So I looked around and I said, I went up to the gallery, and I saw a painting of Mary Cassette.
By Mary Cassette?
Yeah, but it was a very interesting group.
a woman and child, and I have a love for children anyway, young children.
And I looked at it, and I said to Leslie, who was the head of the life, I said, what do you think of that?
He said, well, it's a great picture.
I said, what do you think it'll go for?
He said, I think it'll go for about $30,000 or $40,000.
That's amazing.
So I called them up in London and I said, listen, I found a very interesting painting I think you'll like.
It's going to go for around $35,000.
She said, go ahead and buy it.
Just like that.
Over the phone.
For sure.
So I bought it for $30,000.
I sent it out to Chicago.
A couple of weeks, he came back.
And it was sold here two months ago.
She put it up at auction.
Can I guess?
About one million.
I was going to say a million and a half.
One million.
About one million bucks.
America said it was, you know, I don't know.
So, I mean, you know, I can tell you stories like that, but what does it mean?
I'm not an art expert, but the picture appealed to me.
She's so wonderful, like I said.
She's an American who actually is a French Impressionist.
Right, but I like the way this child with the mother, you know, and to me it had a feeling, you see.
If I was somebody else, I think, you'd buy a race car.
Was it a large picture?
No, it was a very large picture.
Sounds wonderful.
$30,000.
And in the catalog, they said, bought by Kennedy at Department of Gallery for $30,000.
And they bought a mint.
Oh, man.
America says.